---
layout: post
title: "Cheats"
categories: game-mechanics
---

### Cheat codes

A set of 12 cheat codes appears in the game code.

To enter a cheat, type it on the keyboard (not case sensitive), hitting the
Return key before and after the code. You can chain together multiple codes this
way. You will hear a beep if a code has been entered correctly.

Bjork
: Voice test. Hit A-U to test one of the 21 voice samples. There is a bug: it
doesn't validate for keys below A, so you get interesting results pressing a
number key: if you press 1, it may ask for disk &Sigma; (character `0x6` in
K240's font). Press space to exit.

ICBM
: Give 4 of each missile and 4 spy satellites to the currently selected
asteroid, whether it belongs to you, an alien, or nobody. Limited to 4 because
aliens are capped to 5 of each missile, so this way it's safe even if the alien
builds one right after you hit the cheat. Of course, aliens can't use spy
satellites as they have no satellite silo, and Tylarans have no missile silos.
If you ICBM an empty asteroid, the missiles will still be there when you
colonize it later.

Iceman
: Freezes all asteroid movement. Use again to restore movement again.

Lemings
: Add 50 population to the current asteroid, regardless of who owns it.  Note
that the cheat code is deliberately  spelled with one M like this. The cheat
code entry method ignores multiples of a letter, so typing _lemmings_
or even _lemmmmminnnnggss_ will work fine.

Loadsadosh
: Give 100,000 credits. Around 0x1a7fa in the game executable _playk240_
(v1.886) you will see the number _000186a0_. Hex edit that to
_000f4240_. Now it will instead give 1 million. The cap is 9,999,999
(one less than 10 million).

NASA
: Create a ship at the current location. It has random hardpoints, like a ship
acquired via reinforcements. Such a ship will always have a weapon in its first
hardpoint to ensure it doesn't accidentally generate an unarmed ship, even
though you may want a shields-only build for a Scoutship or Transporter. It will
also never generate a ship with a Static Inducer or Warp Generator, although it
can generate the other blueprint-only hardpoints (Deflector, Shield X40, Shield
X50).

Noises
: Sound test. Press A-W to test one of the in-game noises. Unlike the Bjork
cheat, this correctly validates its inputs.

Panel
: Extracts a useful set of buttons. The buttons don't show until the screen is
refreshed, but the easiest way to do this is to tap the left and right cursor
keys to rotate the asteroid and back.

Skyscraper
: The build time of all Terran buildings is reduced to one day. Doesn't affect
buildings already under construction.

Telescope
: You can see all asteroids on the field view without scouting for them first,
and view the surface of enemy asteroids without a spy satellite. However, in all
other ways, undiscovered asteroids still count as undiscovered. Missiles you
fire at them will disappear (peculiarly, the Tylarans, who do not use missiles,
are exempt from this). Scoutships will still earn rewards for discovering
asteroids.

Tracey
: Toggle voice on/off. Named after Tracey Park, who provides the voice samples.

Widget
: Toggle which blueprints you own. This is a bother because even though you gain
every blueprint you didn't already have, you lose every blueprint you already
had, and they're usually good ones so you have to buy them back. Clicking on the
Sci-Tek button when you own every blueprint does nothing. If you bind a building
to one of the number buttons before you trade it away in the Widget toggle, you
can still press that button to build it.

### Glitches and tricks

__Ship repair glitch__: Repair Facility repairs ships in hangars, but it does
not account correctly for shields. Any ship which currently has more Armour than
default for its type (i.e. due to having shields) will continue repairing up to
255 Armour. Any higher will overflow back to 0 and destroy the ship. However,
any ship reduced to the unshielded default Armour or below is capped at the
default.

__Glimpse enemy asteroids__: Set a hotkey to an enemy asteroid. Go to colony
view of one of your own asteroids, or an empty asteroid. Now hit the hotkey.
You'll get an error message, but for a second the game will let you see the
enemy colony.

__Faster scout report__: A Scoutship gives its report when it returns to the
asteroid it set out from, but that doesn't have to be one of your colonies. You
can speed up scout reports by sending the scout to a closer unoccupied asteroid,
then scouting from there. You will get the report when it returns to the
unoccupied asteroid it set out from.

Even better, if you do an ore survey at that asteroid, you will get it
immediately. In other words, send the Scoutship to the asteroid, then when it
arrives, order it to do the survey. It will "return" to the asteroid it just
surveyed and give you the report immediately.

__Other minor features__: See [bugs](../game-mechanics/bugs.html) and
[miscellaneous features](../game-mechanics/miscellaneous-features.html)
for a few other quirks of the game. Notably, the Photon Cannon ship hardpoint is
more powerful than the more expensive Plasma; and you can hold the left mouse
button to skip the intro sequence.

### Falsely claimed secret alien cheat

According to reader-submitted tips in Amiga magazines back in the day, a secret
extra-hard alien exists in K240. By attempting to load a save game from K240
Disk 2 and clicking the left mouse button to proceed, a save game named "Babylon
5" will be found in save game slot 1. This tip was submitted by one
Andrew Stoke of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne to 
[Amiga Power #46](https://amr.abime.net/review_20511) (Feb 1995),
and later resubmitted by another reader to 
[CU Amiga](https://amr.abime.net/review_29252) (Sep 1995).

Unfortunately, this "secret alien" tip is completely false.

There are no save games on disk 2. It's impossible to save to disk 2, because it
has only 15KB free, whereas K240 save games are about 150KB each. There is no
additional alien file, no code in the game relating to a secret seventh alien,
and no text reading "Babylon 5" on any of the disks. The cheat does not
actually function as described in any version, not even in any known pirate or
modified versions. There is also not enough space on disk 1 or 3 for one save
game file.

The "secret alien" tip must either be a deliberate hoax, or the originator was
simply mistaken for some reason. Some theories which may partially explain the
latter scenario:

1. At least one distributed version of K240 has a _deleted_ partial save game
file `k240.1` on disk 2 which someone may have recovered. If you attempt to save
to disk 2, the game will write the first 15KB or so before running out of space
and deleting the partial file. Ejecting the disk while writing, or recovering
the deleted file somehow, would result in a partial save file that can be loaded
successfully to begin a new game. Testing suggests that loading such a partial
save will begin a new game with the default enemy, which may lend some
credibility to this theory. Additionally, the content of the partial save file
can influence the game to a limited extent. However, it's not a deliberately
hidden secret enemy as the cheat says, but rather a bug caused by loading a
partial save game file.
2. Someone deleted the HD installer from Disk 3 to make room for a single save
game. They then saved at the start of a game or before game to test it, and it
worked. Someone else then borrowed that disk or a copy of it, and played a round
of the game, during which the game requested Disk 3 to play the voice files.
With Disk 3 still inserted, the player then attempted to load a game, and was
surprised to find that it worked. They forgot that they had inserted Disk 3, and
mistakenly assumed that the save was on Disk 2.
3. The string `k240_2:k240.1` appears in the game executable, which may lead
a casual analyst to assume there must be a secret save game on disk 2. However,
this string is used to load games from a hard disk install, where `k240_2:` will
be assigned to the hard disk install rather than physical disk 2. Someone who
discovered the cheat strings in the game code may have also noticed this string
and made an incorrect deduction.
4. Disk 2 has a file called "idfile" which is not copied on a HD install, and
its presence is used by the game to determine whether to load save games from
DF0: or the hard disk. If you performed a manual HD install by copying the
files and setting up assigns in user-startup (entirely possible as the HD
installer was on disk 3 and may have gone unnoticed by some), the game will
still try to load saves from `DF0:`, which may somehow have confused a player
into thinking his save is loading from somewhere else.

### Missile glitches

[CU Amiga](https://amr.abime.net/review_20717) (Jan 1996) printed a cheat that
you can simply command any alien colony to fire its own missiles at itself.
[CU Amiga](https://amr.abime.net/review_29330) (Jun 1996) reports a related
glitch that if you mash the "fire missile" button quickly enough after firing
all your missiles of one type, you can glitch out the missile display and
effectively give yourself unlimited missiles. The German magazine _Amiga Games_
(Feb 1996) also both of these, on pages 86 and 95 of that issue.

Both of these glitches are true, but only for the
[CU Amiga demo version](../prototypes/cu-amiga-demo.html)
of the game. The full version of the game fixes both of these bugs. You
can't fire missiles from an asteroid where you have no CPU, and the unlimited
missile glitch no longer works.

### Historic note on cheat codes

A text string in the CU Amiga coverdisk demo of K240 refers to cheat codes as
"help codes", which may suggest that the Help key was originally used to trigger
the cheat codes in development. However, the codes themselves appear to have
been removed from the demo.

The earliest source I can find which published the cheat codes was
[Games Master #21](https://amr.abime.net/review_40955) (Sep 1994)
which listed all but the Bjork cheat. There are a few errors, like
misidentifying Widget as the sound test.

Stephen Birmingham's cheats disk Back Door v2.81, dated 3 September 1994,
includes only four of the cheat codes: Loadsadosh, Widget, Iceman, and
Skyscraper. He notes that there are others which he has not received yet. A lot
of sources repeat only these four codes, for some reason, even though the
original source must have had access to all twelve. I speculate that there was
some Amiga magazine in 1994 that only printed four of the codes for space
limitations.

[Amiga Power #47](https://amr.abime.net/review_17331) (Mar 1995) listed six
of the cheats: Skyscraper, Loadsadosh, Telescope, Iceman, ICBM, and "Leming"
(sic). [Amiga Computing US Edition #4](https://amr.abime.net/review_48855)
(Nov 1995) repeats the same codes. Notably missing are NASA, Widget, Panel, and
the sound test cheats.

The cheats disk BackDoor v6.66, dated 5 April 1995, printed all twelve cheats.
The disk credits Rachel White of publisher Gremlin Interactive for supplying the
cheats for K240. BackDoor v6.66 notably fails to include the requirement to hit
return before each cheat, even though v2.81 previously mentioned it.

[Amiga Format #94](https://amr.abime.net/review_15174) (Feb 1997) printed only
Loadsadosh, Widget, Iceman, and Skyscraper. The same set were reprinted in 
[CU Amiga](https://amr.abime.net/review_35435) (May 1998).

