---
layout: post
title: "Bugs"
categories: game-mechanics
---

Here are a few bugs which appear in the game.

### Fleet bug

Fleets will sometimes appear to jump from one asteroid to another, followed by a
game crash.

This bug is present in the v1.886 release, but analysis of the code shows that a
change to fix it appeared in the [v2.000
update](../history/version-differences.html). This appears to be the only change
made in that version, aside from an updated version string.

### Alien scaffold bug

Clicking on an alien scaffold while in "flat" building mode sometimes causes
junk to appear on screen instead of a building name.

### Yards need more Bytanium

When building a ship, the construction window sometimes incorrectly reports a
shortage of ore, although construction will proceed normally.

The game gradually deducts ore during the ship's construction process. However,
it reports an error if at any point there is insufficient ore to cover the
total requirements.

For example, the Orbital Space Dock requires 10 Bytanium and 20 Dragonium.
Suppose you sell all but 10 Bytanium, because nothing in the game but an OSD
requires Bytanium, and start construction on an OSD. Once you're down to 9
Bytanium in stores, the OSD will complain that there's not enough, because
there's less than 10. However, construction will proceed normally.

### Photon or Plasma?

The game is inconsistent as to whether photon or plasma is the most powerful. In
turret buildings, Photon is described as superior to Plasma, and the game code
confirms this (Photon deals 8 damage, Plasma 5 damage, and Laser 2 damage).

However, with ship hardpoints, Plasma (9000 CR) costs more than Photon (4500
CR) and is described in the manual as superior. The game code confirms that this
is a mistake: Photon Cannon, despite being cheaper, is more powerful. The ship
cannons deal exactly the same damage as their turret counterparts.

### Wrong blueprint

The blueprints of the Static Inducer and Warp Generator don't match their
appearance in in the build window.

In the Sci-Tek screen, the cross-shaped hardpoint is the Static Inducer, while
the more cannon-shaped item is the Warp Generator. Note the Warp Generator's
reference to "cloak sequencer" in the graphic. In the Construction Yard screen,
they are swapped.

### Minor typos

In the missile build screen, "AREA EXPLOSIVE." has a full stop at the end of its
name, but no other missile does.

The game consistently misspells _hangar_ as _hanger_.
