---
layout: post
title: "#4: Tylarans"
categories: alien
---

The Tylarans are a medium-difficulty race with a slow rate of expansion.

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

### Unique traits

The Tylarans do not use missiles, and do not mine.

They do not have any specific building to produce food, air or water, and can
survive without Habitat as long as their Control Centre survives. They are
resistant to radiation, 

As long as there is at least one Habitat, Tylarans gain 2 population per day, to
a maximum of 200 per Habitat. They are resistant to radiation, losing one
colonist per day if radiation is 50% or higher, but this does not prevent new
population, meaning population can grow by 1 per day even with high radiation.

The Tylarans possess a technology which repels missiles to random asteroids.
Since the game treats spy satellites in transit as missiles, this can even repel
a spy satellite.

A unique quirk of the Tylarans is that you can fire missiles at asteroids you
have not yet discovered, but which you can see via the Telescope cheat. This may
be a feature added for testing purposes.

### Buildings

Each alien building has a name, a type (as it counts on a spy satellite report),
Hit Points, build time (in days), a height (for the purpose of scaffold), a
width (1, for one-square, or 4 for a 2x2 building), a softcap (buildings marked
! have a hard cap instead), and the building at the equivalent position in the
Terran building list.

| Name                      | Type    |  HP |  BT | H | W |  Cap | Equivalent
|:--------------------------|:--------|----:|----:|--:|--:|-----:|:-----------------------
| Habitat                   | General |  16 |  20 | 2 | 1 |    6 | Living Quarters
| Power Generator           | Power   |  16 |  22 | 2 | 1 |    8 | Solar Panel
| Rad Shield                | General |  32 |  35 | 2 | 1 |    5 | Decontamination Filter
| Force Field Node          | Defence |  32 |  60 | 1 | 1 |    2 | Screen Generator
| Seismic Atomiser          | Offense |  20 |  30 | 2 | 1 |    2 | ~~Ore Teleporter~~
| Data Gatherer             | General |  15 |  35 | 3 | 1 |    1!| Sensor Array
| Turret                    | Offense |  16 |  40 | 1 | 1 |    6 | Plasma Turret
| Turret                    | Offense |  20 |  20 | 1 | 1 |    6 | Photon Turret
| Thrusters                 | Offense |  32 |  61 | 3 | 4 |    1!| Asteroid Engines
| Power Collector           | Power   |  29 |  61 | 1 | 4 |    2 | Powerplant
| Control Centre            | General |  32 |  70 | 3 | 4 |    1!| Command Centre
| Fleet Factory             | Offense |  24 |  25 | 2 | 4 |    4 | Construction Yard
| Turret                    | Offense |  16 |  15 | 1 | 1 |    6 | Laser Turret
| Science Facility          | General |  20 |  35 | 1 | 1 |    2 | ~~Medical Center~~
| Energiser                 | Offense |  20 |  55 | 2 | 1 |    1 | ~~Protected Environment Control~~
| Proton Launcher           | General |  16 |  25 | 2 | 1 |    6 | ~~Hydroponics~~
| Warp Manipulator          | Defence |  16 |  28 | 1 | 1 |    6 | ~~Hydration Plant~~
| Fluxxer                   | Power   |  16 |  30 | 3 | 1 |    4 | ~~Security Centre~~

Control Centre
: Colony must have at least one Control Centre or Habitat, or be destroyed.

Data Gatherer
: Increases the chances of spotting Terran spy satellites. The base chance is 1%
plus a cumulative 1% per day, and each Data Gatherer adds an additional chance
per day, although a colony will never build more than one.

Energiser
: Unknown offensive building.

Fleet Factory
: A shipyard. A maximum of four per colony can operate. Requires either a Power
Collector or Power Generator.

Fluxxer
: A power type building required to build ships.

Force Field Node
: Screen Generator. Halves all building damage to covered buildings, assuming it
works like the Terran equivalent. Has a soft cap of 2 per asteroid.

Habitat
: Each Habitat holds up to 200 colonists. If there are no Habitats, the colony
can still survive, losing one colonist per day. This fits the lore of Tylarans
being at home in the cold of space. If there are no Habitat or Control Centre,
the colony is destroyed.

Power Collector
: A powerplant. A Power Collector or Power Generator is required to build ships.

Power Generator
: Equivalent to a solar panel. A Power Collector or Power Generator is required
to build ships.

Proton Launcher
: An unknown "General" type building. Often built alongside a Warp Manipulator.

Rad Shield
: Reduces radiation by 30%. If radiation is 50% or higher, the colony loses one
colonist per day (but new colonists can still be produced, at a rate of 2/day,
for a net gain of 1 colonist). Since the housing and power checks occur first,
population losses to radiation are ignored if there's a housing or power
shortage.

Science Facility
: Unknown.

Seismic Atomiser
: An unknown Offensive type building.

Thrusters
: Asteroid engines observed to allow travel at speeds of up to 8.

Turret
: A laser turret which deals 4 damage, twice as powerful as the Terran laser
turret. Fires on a 6-day cooldown.

Turret
: A plasma turret which deals 6 damage, 20% more powerful than the Terran plasma
turret. Fires on a 6-day cooldown.

Turret
: A photon turret which deals 10 damage, 20% more powerful than the Terran
photon turret. Fires on a 6-day cooldown.

Warp Manipulator
: Unknown Defence type building. Reacts to incoming missiles 32% of the time.
This appears to be the technology which reflects incoming missiles. Often built
alongside Proton Launcher.

### Building strategy

The Tylarans build more slowly than any other species, with each asteroid
attempting a new build every 70 days. They do not require currency or ore to
build (in fact, they do not mine). When there is no particular need, they
randomly build one of the following clusters of four buildings:

* 0: Proton Launcher, Warp Manipulator, Turret (Laser), Power Generator
* 1: Habitat, Power Collector, Habitat, Control Centre
* 2: Fleet Factory, Fluxxer, Power Generator, Turret (Plasma)
* 3: Thrusters, Seismic Atomiser, Turret (Photon), Power Collector
* 4: Rad Shield, Force Field Node, Turret (Photon), Turret (Plasma)
* 5: Energiser, Turret (Photon), Turret (Plasma), Power Generator
* 6: Science Facility, Turret (Laser), Data Gatherer, Habitat
* 7: Warp Manipulator, Turret (Photon), Fleet Factory, Rad Shield

Each building has a 100% chance to be placed until it reaches the cap for that
building type, with a 15% chance to ignore the cap, except for Data Gatherer,
Thrusters, and Control Center, which are hard capped at 1 per colony.

The Tylarans have a more complex decision-making process when it comes to
buildings than most aliens. They are slow to react to emergencies, placing
build priority after 32 days instead of 16 days like most aliens.

If there are no Power Collector or Power Generator, or no Habitat, the colony
sets its priority to build cluster 1: Habitat x2, Power Collector, and Control
Centre. They do not appear to have a food building.

If radiation is 50% or higher, they set priority to build cluster 7: Warp
Manipulator, Turret (Photon), Fleet Factory and Rad Shield.

Otherwise, unless a certain flag is set, it builds at random. If that flag is
set, building priorities shift as follows:

If there is a power or housing shortage, it builds cluster 1 as normal. If there
is a radiation problem, it switches to cluster 4 (Rad Shield, Force Field Node,
Turret (Photon), and Turret (Plasma).

Otherwise, it builds cluster 3 (Thrusters, Seismic Atomiser, Turret (Photon),
and Power Collector); unless there is already a Thrusters, then it builds
cluster 4; unless there is already a Force Field Node, then it builds set 5
(Energiser, Turret (Photon), Turret (Plasma), Power Generator).

### Missiles

Tylarans are the only alien which do not use missiles. They have no equivalent
to Weapons Factory or Missile Silo.

### Ships

Each ship an armor value, speed, number of hardpoints (sometimes erroneous),
ID number in the game code, and up to six hardpoints. The names here are
arbitrary and do not appear in the code.

Name                  | Armor | S | H |    ID   | HP1| HP2| HP3| HP4| HP5| HP6|
----------------------|------:|--:|--:|:--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
"Fighter"             |    20 | 2 | 1 |    3c   | 07 |    |    |    |    |    |
"Blue Dragon"         |    30 | 2 | 3 |    3d   | 06 | 00 | 04 |    |    |    |
"Red Dragon"          |    40 | 1 | 2 |    3e   | 06 | 05 | 00 | 02 |    |    |
"Scoutship"           |     5 | 1 | 1 |    3f   | 05 |    |    |    |    |    |
"Small Transporter"   |    30 | 1 | 2 |  ~~41~~ | 06 | 07 |    |    |    |    |
"Gold Dragon"         |    50 | 1 | 4 |  ~~40~~ | 08 | 07 | 04 | 0c |    |    |
"Transporter?"        |    20 | 0 | 2 |    42   | 06 | 06 |    |    |    |    |
"Battleship"          |   100 | 0 | 6 |    43   | 07 | 07 | 00 | 04 | 0c | 0c |

Ship $3c "Fighter"
: A fast 20 Armor ship with a Plasma Cannon (6 damage).

Ship $3d "Blue Dragon"
: A fast 30 Armor ship with Photon Cannon (10 damage), Ion Cannon, and Vortex
Mine.

Ship $3e "Red Dragon"
: A slower 40 Armor ship with four hardpoints: a Photon Cannon (10 damage),
Laser Cannon (4 damage), Ion Cannon, and Napalm Orb.

Ship $3f "Scoutship"
: A slower 5 Armor ship with a Laser Cannon (4 damage). Exceptionally weak among
alien scoutships.

Ship $40 "Small Transporter"
: A slower 30 Armor ship with a Photon Cannon (10 damage) and Plasma Cannon (6
damage). Its number is swapped with the previous ship in the game data. A long
narrow ship. Despite its small size, this is the Transporter, the ship which
starts new colonies.

Ship $41 "Gold Dragon"
: A slower 50 Armor ship with four hardpoints: Static Inducer, Plasma Cannon (6
damage), Vortex Mine, and a unique golden Tylaran Vortex Mine. Has the incorrect
number in the game data, but this is ignored in the game code, and if you
generate a ship 41 it appears as this ship.  A wide ship that looks like two
side-by-side.

Ship $42 "Transporter?"
: A slow 20 Armor ship with two Photon Cannons (10 damage). It fills the
Transporter slot, but its status is dubious, since the Small Transporter has
been observed to start new colonies.

Ship $43 "Battleship"
: A slow 100 Armor ship with six hardpoints: Two Plasma Cannons (10 damage), two
unique golden Tylaran Vortex Mines, one regular Vortex Mine, and an Ion Cannon.

### Starting resources

When facing the Tylarans, the player starts with the following resources:

* Cash: 250,000 credits (default)

The alien colony begins with the following building clusters:

* 1: Habitat, Power Collector, Habitat, Control Centre
* 2: Fleet Factory, Fluxxer, Power Generator, Turret (Plasma)

They start with the following ships:
* $3f "Scoutship" x1
* $40 "Heavy Fighter" x1
* $41 "Gold Dragon" x1
* $42 "Transporter?" x1

### Colonization strategy

Each Tylaran colony considers starting a new colony every 45 days. There is a 5%
chance each time that it creates a new colony.

A new colony builds the following cluster of buildings:

* 1: Habitat, Power Collector, Habitat, Control Centre

### Mining strategy

The Tylarans do not mine. They have no buildings for mining or storing ore.
