---
layout: post
title: "Frequently Asked Questions"
categories: about
---

This frequently asked questions list summarizes the project's purpose and
findings.

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

### Solved gameplay mysteries

This project has been able to answer the following long-standing questions. Most
topics are other pages on the site.

Why does K240 crash sometimes?
: An error in the fleet handling routines appears to be the culprit. The longer
the game goes on, the more likely this game will trigger. A bug-fixed version of
the game was released. Press "V" during a game; v1.886 has the bug, v2.000 is
fixed. The free authorized download from Gremlin World is unfortunately the old
version. See [bugs](../game-mechanics/bugs.html) and
[differences between versions](../history/version-differences.html).

What causes the message "Asteroid structure too weak"?
: A colony can only have a maximum of 100 buildings, regardless of building size
or asteroid size.

I suddenly won without doing anything. Why?
: The [Ax'Zilanth](../alien/3-ax-zilanths.html) have an asteroid teleporter
technology known as the Mass Displacement Podule. There's a chance they will
teleport directly into another asteroid and be destroyed. Other aliens may
plausibly be destroyed by normal asteroid collisions.

Why does the OSD complain I don't have enough Bytanium or Dragonium?
: The "YARDS NEED MORE &lt;ore name&gt;" message is calculated incorrectly. Ore
is used up gradually during the production of a ship, but the status message
incorrectly compares it to the total ore required to produce the ship, not the
remaining ore required. This usually happens with larger ships that need
uncommon ore, since it's rare that you run out of Crystalite. It especially
happens when building the Orbital Space Dock (10 Bytanium, 20 Dragonium), since
nothing else uses Bytanium so it's optimum to sell all but 10 Bytanium.  The
ship will still build correctly; only the status message is incorrect.

Are there any cheats for K240?
: There are exactly twelve [cheat codes](../game-mechanics/cheats.html). Other
cheats reported by some sources are either false (secret hard alien cheat) or
only applied to the demo version (fire alien missiles, or fire unlimited
missiles).

What do I need population for?
: You need 8 colonists per Missile Silo, Mine, Deep Bore Mine, Seismic
Penetrator, Command Centre, and Construction Yard. If you don't have enough, any
mining or ship/missile construction work operates at 40% efficiency. No other
buildings require population. Additionally, you gain an undocumented 100 credits
per day per colony and 2 credits per day per colonist. You also need at least
one colonist or the colony is automatically destroyed.
See [building behaviour](../game-mechanics/building-behaviour.html).

How do I increase population growth?
: You can't, other than reducing population loss due to things like radiation.
Each day, there is a fixed 40% chance for a colony to gain one colonist, and a
10% chance to lose one colonist. It is unaffected by current population,
unrest, food surplus, hospitals, or anything else. However, hospitals do reduce
the rate of colonists killed by radiation.
See [health, radiation and population growth](../game-mechanics/health-radiation-and-population-growth.html).

What triggers the bribe to improve ore shipments?
: It's completely random. The amount of ore you sell makes no difference. See
[random events](../game-mechanics/random-events.html).

What causes the breakup of a Scoutship?
: [Random event](../game-mechanics/random-events.html). It's dramatic to assume
the Scoutship was intercepted by the enemy, but it's random.

Does destroying an asteroid increase the risk of meteor showers?
: No. It's a random event.

Why don't Tetracorp send me reinforcements like they used to?
: Reinforcements are [random events](../game-mechanics/random-events.html), and
twice as common as other random events. The first random event will always be
reinforcements, but only against the first two aliens.

My last Transporter was destroyed and Tetracorp suddenly sent me a new one!
Coincidence?
: It's no coincidence. If you have no Transporter, the next random event will
always give you a Transporter.

Why did Tetracorp send me a Transporter with two Napalm Orbs and no shields?
: The hardpoints on the ship are determined entirely randomly. They can have any
hardpoint except for Static Inducer and Warp Generator. The first hardpoint is
always a weapon.

How many Medical Centres and Security Centres do I need?
: You need one Medical Centre and Security Centre for every 100 full colonists
after the first 50. Security is critical
(see [security and morale](../game-mechanics/security-and-morale.html) for what
happens if you let unrest grow), and even after you build enough Security
Centres, unrest only subsides slowly.
Medical Centre is only needed to cure outbreaks, which only occur by
[random events](../game-mechanics/random-events.html), although they
have a small effect in reducing radiation.

How many Decontamination Filters do I need?
: Fewer than you might think. Although every Decontamination Filter reduces
radiation by 30%, every Medical Centre additionally reduces the _effect_ of
radiation by 10%. Even then, you can reach 70% radiation before you start
suffering a net population loss on average.
See [health, radiation and population growth](../game-mechanics/health-radiation-and-population-growth.html).

Do Decontamination Filters permanently erase radiation?
: No. They sometimes appear to, because you can demolish a Decontamination
Filter and find radiation still at 0%. What actually happened is that you mined
the ores that are generating that radiation: 10% per 100 Asteros, per 2 Traxium,
and per 1 Nexos.

Why is my money going up even when I haven't sold any ore?
: An important undocumented feature is that you gain 100 credits per day per
colony, and 2 credits per day per colonist. This is the primary benefit of
population, since workers are only required to operate mines and to build ships
or missiles. Even then, each relevant building only requires 8 workers, and
those buildings still operate at 40% efficiency in a worker shortage.

What is the Kll-Kp-Qua "special type of warhead" mentioned in the manual?
: A missile which reduces the population of an asteroid by 20.

What does Last Minute Intelligence mean by "be careful when taking over an enemy
asteroid"?
: Asteroids which once belonged to the Ore Eaters explode when colonized. It is
unknown if this is intended to represent structural weakness from over-mining,
or some kind of boobytrap. It has the game benefit of destroying asteroids which
the Ore Eaters been mined dry, which allows new asteroids to spawn in.

Do the aliens follow the same rules as the player?
: No. The rules vary considerably between individual aliens (see the alien pages
on the [index page](https://tetracorp.github.io/k240/). For example, some
actually mine ore, while others do not. There are some commonalities; e.g.
aliens do not use currency, do not buy blueprints, and are limited to five of
each missile.

Are the upgraded turret blueprints worth it?
: Plasma Turret deals as much damage as 2.5 Laser Turrets, and Photon Turret
deals as much damage as 4 Laser Turrets. They are 60/66% more power-efficient
than the Laser per point of damage, and become cost-effective per point of
damage at 20/17 turrets, respectively, accounting for the investment of the
blueprint.
However, Laser with the Turret Optimiser is 100% more power-efficient and has
the advantage that it also doubles every turret on a Protected building (which
are worth building anyway because they usually have higher hit points). It's not
cost-effective, but it stacks very well with Photon Turret, where it deals 8
times the damage of base Laser and is 3.2 times more power-efficient.

How many Anti-Missile Pods should I build?
: One Anti-Missile Pod has a 21% chance to shoot down any given missile.
However, each additional Pod only adds 2% to the chance, to a maximum of 71%
with 26 Pods. Building 26 Anti-Missile Pods would cost 182,000 CR plus 78MW of
power generation (20 Solar Generators for 30,000 CR), plus the blueprint at
250,000 CR, so 462,000 CR in total. It might be better to spend that money on
nuclear missiles to destroy the enemy before they fire.

When firing a valuable missile like a Mega, is it worth sending other missiles
with it as decoys to prevent it from being shot down?
: It makes no difference. Once a missile reaches an asteroid, the only thing
which can stop it is Anti-Missile Pods or their alien equivalent (Ore Eater
Defence Battery, Rigellian Defence Battery, and Swixaran Tentacular Defender).
However, each missile has a flat percentage chance to be shot down, which isn't
affected by the number of incoming missiles or the rate of incoming missiles.

Are there any errors in the game manual?
: A few, mostly regarding specific
[building behaviour](../game-mechanics/building-behaviour.html). Most notably,
Powerplants produce 32MW/day while there is unmined Asteros, and no power when
it is depleted. Asteroid Engines use 2-7 power rather than 0-5. Ships in a
"hanger" are only only repaired if you have a Repair Facility, and ships in
orbit are never repaired even if you have a Repair Facility.
The Photon Cannon is more powerful than the Plasma Cannon, as are the ship
hardpoint versions.
For features which are not documented in the manual, see... this entire site,
really.

The final game screen gives me a bonus of 5,000,000 credits. Do I actually get
to keep it?
: No. Internally, your money isn't acutally incremented in 5,000,000. Not that
it would make a difference, since your money doesn't carry over between
missions.
In [Dungeons of Avalon](https://tetracorp.github.io/dungeons-of-avalon/), you actually do get to
keep the 20,000 gold you get for winning.

### Still unknown

How does the alien AI function?
: Unknown. A few variables have been identified but their functions are not yet
understood.

What does Last Minute Intelligence mean by the "very predictable" pattern in the
Kll-Kp-Qua attacks?
: Unknown.

What damage does each missile and ship hardpoint do?
: The exact effect of fire-based weapons, Vortex, and some are yet to be
determined precisely.

The manual says the Ore eaters only attack mining colonies. Does that mean they
won't attack asteroids without any mines?
: Unknown.

Why is Patrick Phelan credited with providing K240's music when there is no
music in K240?
: Unknown. Was there once music?

What was the Orbital Shuttle for?
: A ship called the [Orbital Shuttle](../prototypes/cut-content.html) appears in
the code, and can be edited in. However, we don't know its original purpose,
what its statstics were supposed to be, or why it was removed.

Why was the third game end screen removed?
: A file called `outro3.mgl` shows a third intro screen which, according to the
code, would have been shown upon defeating the swixarans. However, defeating the
Swixarans actually just shows `outro1.mgl`, the standard win screen. Why?

### Project questions

Have the sprites been ripped from the game?
: Some large pieces of art have been extracted from the
[MGL files](../data/images.html). Sprites are harder to extract due to the
variable sprite height making it difficult to automatically determine where
sprites start and end, but progress is being made on extracting them.

How easy would it be to mod the game to let you use alien technology?
: Not trivial. Firstly, most building and ship hardpoints are hardcoded to a
list of fixed size, so adding one ship, building or missile would either mean
removing one to make room, or changing code in multiple places to increase the
number of slots. Secondly, alien technology is often hardcoded to work for the
alien only; e.g. even if you put the Swixaran self-destruct device on your own
ships, it would only blow up your own asteroids.

How was this disassembly acquired?
: A disassembly program called _IRA_ recreates 68000 assembly language code from
an executable.  It's not the original source code, and importantly is missing
variable names and comments, making understanding the code a challenge. All
variable names and comments appearing in the code have been added myself. See
[disassembly and analysis tutorial](../data/disassembly-tutorial.html) for more
information.

What was K240 originally programmed with?
: According to _Games-X_ issue #1, K240's predecessor _Utopia_ was programmed
in 68000 assembly language using a system known as
[SNASM68K](https://segaretro.org/SNASM68K) running on a 25MHz 286 PC with a 40MB
hard disk. While native assemblers existed on the Amiga, SNASM included a
powerful hardware debugger which connected the PC to the Amiga via SCSI, and the
PC's faster CPU meant it could assemble the program more quickly than what was
presumably a 7MHz Amiga 500. (The publishers of SNASM would notably go on to
produce the Psy-Q devkit used by most PlayStation games.)
K240 was also programmed in 68000 assembly language, and therefore probably
also used SNASM68K, given its advantages.

Does the original source code exist?
: It is believed that the programmer Graeme Ing still possesses the original
source code somewhere on floppy disks. I don't know if he still has access to
them, or if the disks are still readable. I'd be interested in acquiring a copy.
